Visualizing repositories using Pygal (#3582)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/visualizing-repositories-using-pygal/index.md

Pygal allows us to create a range of graphs and charts. You'll learn how to construct a visualisation that shows the comparative popularity of Python works on GitHub in this tutorial. We'll create an interactive bar chart, where the height of each bar will represent the sum of stars earned by the project. By clicking a bar, you'll be sent to the project's GitHub page.

### Prerequisites

> You'll need some Python skills to follow along with this tutorial. You must be in a position to work with web APIs in Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll need some Python skills to follow along with this tutorial. You must be in a position to work with web APIs in Python.
```
Check on the prerequisites, a bit unclear. You could probably list the prerequisites such as PIP.

### Installing pygal

> Consider the following command to install pygal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install Pygal, run the command below;
```

```python

$ pip install pygal

```

> Visit [this](http://www.pygal.org/en/stable/installing.html) if this is your first time using pip.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can visit [Pygal official site](http://www.pygal.org/en/stable/installing.html) for more information installation of Pygal.
```

### The pygal gallery

> Check the chart types page to explore what types of charts Pygal can generate: Select **Documentation**, finally **Chart types** in [pygal](http://www.pygal.org/). You can examine how the visualizations are created by looking at the source code for each case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the chart types page to explore what types of charts Pygal can generate: Select **Documentation**, finally **Chart types** in [pygal](http://www.pygal.org/). You can examine how the visualizations are created by looking at the source code for each case.
```
Kindly introduce the reader on what Pygal gallery is and how it fits into this article.

### Visualizing repositories

> Since we'll want to incorporate more than one repository in our visualisation. Let's create a loop that prints specified information about each of the repositories supplied by the API call so that we can add them all to the visualization:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we'll want to incorporate more than one repository in our visualization. Let's create a loop that prints specified information about each of the repositories supplied by the API call so that we can add them all to the visualization.
To achieve this, run the code below:
```
I assume this is the formal beginning of the article. You can add something to indicate and capture reader's attention to diving into the article.

```python

import requests

url = 'https://api.github.com/search/repositories?q=language:python&sort=stars' # Initiate an API request.

request = requests.get(url)

print("Status code:", request.status_code)

respons_dict = request.json()  # In a variable, save the API response.

print("Total repos:", respons_dict['total_count'])

# Examine the repository's details.

repos_dicts = respons_dict['items']

print("Repos found:", len(repos_dicts))

print("\nSelected info about each repository:")

for repos_dict in repos_dicts:   #go through all the dictionaries in repos_dicts.

    print('name-:', repos_dict['name'])

    print('owner-:', repos_dict['owner']['login'])

    print('stars-:', repos_dict['stargazers_count'])

    print('repo-:', repos_dict['html_url'])

    print('Description-:', repos_dict['description'])

> ```

Reviewer: You can add a little more comments where necessary within the article, for even beginners to flow easily.
Also use more connector words like 'next or second' to keep the article structured

We print the owner of each project, its name, the number of stars it has, the project's description, and its GitHub URL inside the loop:

```bash

name-: public-apis

owner-: public-apis

stars-: 144910

repo-: https://github.com/public-apis/public-apis

Description-: A collective list of free APIs

name-: system-design-primer

owner-: donnemartin

stars-: 139818

repo-: https://github.com/donnemartin/system-design-primer

Description-: Learn how to design large-scale systems.

--snip--

name-: Python

owner-: TheAlgorithms

stars-: 113616

repo-: https://github.com/TheAlgorithms/Python

Description: All Algorithms implemented in Python

```

> 

Reviewer: There is a bit of disconnect with the next statement. Qualify the next statement with has happened or what your trying to achieve  right after the above code.

> Let's construct a visual representation of the current popularity of Python works on GitHub, since we have some relevant data. We will create a bar chart: the amount of stars the project has earned will be represented by the height of each bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's construct a visual representation of the current popularity of Python works on GitHub, since we have some relevant data. We will create a bar chart: the amount of stars the project has earned will be represented by the height of each bar.
To get this done, you can run the code below:
```

```python

import requests

import pygal

from pygal.style import LightColorizedStyle as LCSe, LightenStyle as LSe

#  Start an API request.

url = 'https://api.github.com/search/repositories?q=language:python&sort=star'

request = requests.get(url)

print("Status  code:", request.status_code)

# In a variable, save the API response.

response_dictionary = request.json()

print("Total-repos:", response_dictionary['total_count'])

# Examine the repository's details.

repos_dicts = response_dictionary['items']

names, stars = [], []

for repos_dict in repos_dicts:

    names.append(repos_dict['name'])

    stars.append(repos_dict['stargazers_count'])

# Make visualization.

mystyle = LSe('#333366', base_style=LCSe)

chart = pygal.Bar(style=mystyle, x_label_rotation=45, show_legend=False)

chart.title = 'Python Projects with the Most Stars on GitHub'

chart.x_labels = names

chart.add('', stars)

chart.render_to_file('py_repos.svg')

```

> To begin, we `import pygal` as well as the `Pygal styles` we'll require for the chart. We'll keep printing the status of the API request return and the total amount of repositories detected to see if the API call was successful. We no longer print information about the specific projects that are returned, because that information will be included in the visualization.

Reviewer: Another small disconnect. Kindly address.
```suggestion
To begin, we `import pygal` as well as the `Pygal styles` we'll require for the chart. We'll keep printing the status of the API request return and the total amount of repositories detected to see if the API call was successful. We no longer print information about the specific projects that are returned, because that information will be included in the visualization.
```

> We make two empty lists to hold the data we’ll include in the chart. We’ll use the name, and the number of stars of each project to label and determine the height of the bars respectively. In the loop, we append the name of each project and the number of stars it has to these lists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we make two empty lists to hold the data we’ll include in the chart. We’ll use the name, and the number of stars of each project to label and determine the height of the bars respectively. In the loop, we append the name of each project and the number of stars it has to these lists.
```

myconfig.major_label_font_size = 17 #set the text size for the major label(The major labels are just the labels on the y-axis)

myconfig.truncate_label = 15  #To reduce the length of long project names to 15 characters, employ truncate label.

myconfig.show_y_guides = False  #set show_y_guides to False hide the horizontal lines on the graph

myconfig.width = 1000   #set a custom width, so the chart will use more of the space in the browser

chart = pygal.Bar(myconfig, style=mystyle)  #make an instance of Bar, and pass myconfig and style as arguments, respectively

chart.title = 'Python Projects with the Most Stars on GitHub'

chart.x_labels = names

chart.add('', stars)

chart.render_to_file('py_repos.svg')

```

The figure below shows the restyled chart:

![The styling for the chart has been refined.](/engineering-education/visualizing-repositories-using-pygal/refining.jpeg)

### Adding Custom Tooltips

In Pygal, floating the mouse over a single bar displays the data it represents. This is known as a tooltip, and it usually displays the amount of stars that a project possesses. Let's make a custom tooltip to display the descriptions of each project.

> Let's have a look at a simple example that uses the first three projects plotted singly with custom labels for each bar. Rather than passing a list of values to `add()`, we'll pass a list of dictionaries:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's have a look at a simple example that uses the first three projects plotted singly with custom labels for each bar. Rather than passing a list of values to `add()`, we'll pass a list of dictionaries with the code below:
```

print("Total repos:", response_dictionary['total_count'])

# Examine the repository's details.

repository_dicts = response_dictionary['items']

names, plot_dictionaries = [], []

for repository_dict in repository_dicts:

   names.append(repository_dict['name'])

   plot_dictionary = {

   'value': repository_dict['stargazers_count'],

   'label': repository_dict['description'],

   'xlink': repository_dict['html_url'],

   }

plot_dictionaries.append( plot_dictionary)

# Make visualization.

mystyle = LSe('#333366', base_style=LCSe)

chart = pygal.Bar(style=mystyle, x_label_rotation=45, show_legend=False)

chart.title = 'Most-Starred Python Projects on GitHub'

chart.x_labels = names

chart.add('',  plot_dictionaries)

chart.render_to_file('py_rs.svg')

```

Here is the output of the above code:

![Adding Clickable Links to Our Graph.](/engineering-education/visualizing-repositories-using-pygal/Adding_Clickable_Links_to_Our_Graph.jpeg)

Pygal converts each bar into an active link by using the URL connected with `'xlink.'` Any of the bars in the chart can be clicked to view the GitHub site for that project in a separate tab in your browser.

### Conclusion

> In this tutorial, we have gained an understanding on how to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we have seen how to:
```

- Install Pygal

- Visualize repositories

- Refining Pygal Charts

- Add Custom Tooltips

- Add Clickable Links to Our Graphs

### Further reading

You can learn more about other concepts by [visiting this page.](https://www.pluralsight.com/guides/building-visualizations-with-pygal).

> 

Reviewer: ---
Peer Review Contributions by: [Elly Omondi](/engineering-education/authors/elly-omondi)
